[Durable Objects] Add documentation for gradual deployments for Durable Objects. (#13564)
cloudflare/cloudflare-docs: content/workers/configuration/versions-and-deployments/gradual-deployments.md

---
pcx_content_type: configuration
title: Gradual deployments
meta:
  description: Incrementally deploy code changes to your Workers with gradual deployments. 
---

{{<heading-pill style="beta">}}Gradual deployments{{</heading-pill>}}

Gradual Deployments give you the ability to incrementally deploy new [versions](/workers/configuration/versions-and-deployments/#versions) of Workers. Using gradual deployments allows you to: 

- Gradually shift traffic to a newer version of your Worker.
- Monitor error rates and exceptions across versions using [analytics and logging](/workers/configuration/versions-and-deployments/gradual-deployments/#observability--logs-analytics-metrics) tooling.
- Perform a [rollback](/workers/configuration/versions-and-deployments/rollbacks/) to a previously stable version if you notice issues when deploying a new version.

{{<Aside type="note">}}

> Gradual deployments are in **beta and under active development**. Please read [limitations](/workers/configuration/versions-and-deployments//gradual-deployments/#limitations) before using this feature.

Reviewer: nit: 2 `/` in this url

```
You should see 10 responses. Responses will reflect the content returned by the versions in your deployment. Responses will vary depending on the percentages configured in step #6. 

> ## Gradual deployments for Durable Objects

Author: @taylorlee we need to document any DO-specific limitations.

One is that you cannot combine a gradual deployment and a DO migration, right?

Anything else?

Author: @taylorlee ping

Reviewer 2: Added this limitation to the limits section below

> ## Gradual deployments for Durable Objects

Reviewer 3: I would love see a section that directly addresses forwards and backwards compatibility requirements between eyeball Worker and Durable Objects during a release (old eyeball talks to new DO and new eyeball talks to old DO).

If this is already mentioned elsewhere outside of gradual deployments page (if not, I think it should be), this could be as simple as a link and mentioning that this easily missed compatibility issue will be exacerbated with gradual deployments.

Author: Good call. The requirement for forwards and backwards compatibility for durable objects and the worker that talks to them is briefly mentioned [here](https://developers.cloudflare.com/durable-objects/platform/known-issues/#code-updates) so I will link to that for now and elaborate on how gradual deployments affects this problem.

I think we could generally do with a section explaining compatibility requirements more generally. I started drafting a new section in the "Versions & Deployments" page that was added in @tanushree-sharma 's [PR](https://github.com/cloudflare/cloudflare-docs/pulls/tanushreesharma-cf) but it's tricky to explain this in general terms without introducing new terminology and/or using diagrams/example code so I'll leave that for another time.

> Due to [global uniqueness](durable-objects/platform/known-issues/#global-uniqueness), only one version of each [Durable Object](/durable-objects/) can run at a time. This means that gradual deployments work slightly differently for Durable Objects.

Author: @tanushree-sharma you added this to the version affinity section before I closed that PR:

> By default, the percentages configured when using gradual deployments operate on a per-request basis — a request has a X% probability of invoking one of two versions of the Worker in the [deployment](/workers/configuration/versions-and-deployments/#deployments). 

I think this deserves to go into the general gradual deployments documentation (in a section preceeding the Durable Objects one), then my claim that "gradual deployments work slightly differently for Durable Objects" will have a point of reference.

> When you create a new gradual deployment for a Worker that defines a Durable Object, each Durable Object is assigned a Worker version based on the percentages you configured in your [deployment](/workers/configuration/deployments/). This version will not change until you create a new deployment.

Reviewer 3: The wording of "When you create a new gradual deployment for a Worker that **defines a Durable Object**, ..." threw me off for a second. I read it as "a deployment that defines a Durable Object", i.e. deploying a change that includes a newly defined Durable Object, which isn't supported.

Author: Yeah, I see how it's ambiguous. Reworded.

### Example

Imagine that you have previously created 3 Durable Objects, [deriving their IDs from the names](/durable-objects/configuration/access-durable-object-from-a-worker/#derive-ids-from-names) "foo", "bar" and "baz".

Your worker is currently on a version that we will call version "A" and you want to gradually deploy a new version "B" of your Worker.

| Durable Object | Version |
| -------------- | ------- |
| foo            | A       |
| bar            | A       |
| baz            | A       |

> Now you create a gradual deployment, setting version "A" to 20% and version "B" to 80%.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Now you create a gradual deployment, setting version "A" to 80% and version "B" to 20%.
```

| Durable Object | Version |
| -------------- | ------- |
| foo            | B       |
| bar            | B       |
| baz            | A       |

Finally, you progress the deployment so that version "B" is set to 100%.

| Durable Object | Version |
| -------------- | ------- |
| foo            | B       |
| bar            | B       |
| baz            | B       |

This is only an example, so the versions assigned to your Durable Objects may be different. However, the following is guaranteed:
- For a given deployment, requests to each Durable Object will always use the same Worker version.
- When you specify each version in the same order as the previous deployment and increase the percentage of a version, Durable Objects which were previously assigned that version will not be assigned a different version. In our example, Durable Object "foo" would never revert from version "B" to version "A".
- The Durable Object will only be [reset](/durable-objects/reference/troubleshooting/#durable-object-reset-because-its-code-was-updated) when it is assigned a different version, so each Durable Object will only be reset once in our example.

> 

Reviewer 4: Should we add a bullet for Websockets not being disconnected with gradual rollouts? I believe we can't remove https://github.com/cloudflare/cloudflare-docs/blob/production/content/durable-objects/reference/websockets.md?plain=1#L23 just yet

Author: Websockets will still be disconnected whenever a specific Durable Object's code is updated. The difference is that a gradual deployment may only update the code for a subset of DOs now, so only websockets to those DOs will be disconnected.

I think ideally we should have a dedicated section on Durable Object resets which defines when they happen and their side effects (e.g. websockets being disconnected) and both the above documentation and the documentation in your link should reference that.

What d'you think?

Reviewer 4: Makes sense, I'll track the DO reset behavior docs.

## Gradual deployments for Durable Objects

Due to [global uniqueness](durable-objects/platform/known-issues/#global-uniqueness), only one version of each [Durable Object](/durable-objects/) can run at a time. This means that gradual deployments work slightly differently for Durable Objects.

When you create a new gradual deployment for a Durable Object Worker, each Durable Object is assigned a Worker version based on the percentages you configured in your [deployment](/workers/configuration/deployments/). This version will not change until you create a new deployment.

### Example

Imagine that you have previously created 3 Durable Objects, [deriving their IDs from the names](/durable-objects/configuration/access-durable-object-from-a-worker/#derive-ids-from-names) "foo", "bar" and "baz".

Your worker is currently on a version that we will call version "A" and you want to gradually deploy a new version "B" of your Worker.

| Durable Object | Version |
| -------------- | ------- |
| foo            | A       |
| bar            | A       |
| baz            | A       |

> Now you create a gradual deployment, setting version "A" to 80% and version "B" to 20%.

Reviewer 5: Language — I'm not sure we want to say "create a gradual deployment" but rather, "when you deploy two versions of your Durable Object at once, setting Version "A to 80% and Version "B" to 20%"

Author: I was trying to be consistent with the language in [this section](https://developers.cloudflare.com/workers/configuration/versions-and-deployments/gradual-deployments/#3-create-a-new-deployment), but I suppose you could argue that the "create a deployment" phrasing is warranted in that "how to"-style section but not this one, so will change it.

| Durable Object | Version |
| -------------- | ------- |
| foo            | B       |
| bar            | B       |
| baz            | B       |

This is only an example, so the versions assigned to your Durable Objects may be different. However, the following is guaranteed:
- For a given deployment, requests to each Durable Object will always use the same Worker version.
- When you specify each version in the same order as the previous deployment and increase the percentage of a version, Durable Objects which were previously assigned that version will not be assigned a different version. In our example, Durable Object "foo" would never revert from version "B" to version "A".
- The Durable Object will only be [reset](/durable-objects/reference/troubleshooting/#durable-object-reset-because-its-code-was-updated) when it is assigned a different version, so each Durable Object will only be reset once in our example.

{{<Aside type="note">}}

Typically, your Durable Object Worker will define both your Durable Object class and the Worker that interacts with it. In this case, you cannot deploy changes to your Durable Object and its Worker independently.

> [You are advised](/durable-objects/platform/known-issues/#code-updates) to ensure that API changes between your Durable Object and its Worker are forwards and backwards compatible whether you are using gradual deployments or not. However, using gradual deployments will make it even more likely that different versions of your Durable Objects and its Worker will interact with each other.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
[You should](/durable-objects/platform/known-issues/#code-updates) ensure that API changes between your Durable Object and its Worker are forwards and backwards compatible, regardless of whether you are using gradual deployments or not. However, using gradual deployments will make it even more likely that different versions of your Durable Objects and its Worker will interact with each other.
```

{{</example>}}

## Gradual deployments for Durable Objects

Due to [global uniqueness](/durable-objects/platform/known-issues/#global-uniqueness), only one version of each [Durable Object](/durable-objects/) can run at a time. This means that gradual deployments work slightly differently for Durable Objects.

When you create a new gradual deployment for a Durable Object Worker, each Durable Object instance is assigned a Worker version based on the percentages you configured in your [deployment](/workers/configuration/versions-and-deployments/#deployments). This version will not change until you create a new deployment.

![Gradual Deployments Durable Objects](/images/workers/platform/versions-and-deployments/durable-objects.png)

### Example

> Imagine that you have previously created 3 Durable Objects, [deriving their IDs from the names](/durable-objects/configuration/access-durable-object-from-a-worker/#derive-ids-from-names) "foo", "bar" and "baz".

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
This example assumes that you have previously created 3 Durable Objects and [derived their IDs from the names](/durable-objects/configuration/access-durable-object-from-a-worker/#derive-ids-from-names) "foo", "bar" and "baz".
```

> Your Worker is currently on a version that we will call version "A" and you want to gradually deploy a new version "B" of your Worker.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Your Worker is currently on a version called version "A" and you want to gradually deploy a new version "B" of your Worker.
```

Author: I'd like to leave this phrasing as-is to convey that this is just a made-up identifier, rather than the actual version ID.

> Here's how the versions of your Durable Objects might change as you progress your gradual deployment:

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Here is how the versions of your Durable Objects might change as you progress your gradual deployment:
```

| Deployment config                      | "foo" | "bar" | "baz" |
| :------------------------------------: | :---: | :---: | :---: |
| Version A: 100% <br>                   | A     | A     | A     |
| Version B: 20% <br> Version A: 80%     | B     | A     | A     |
| Version B: 50% <br> Version A: 50%     | B     | B     | A     |
| Version B: 100% <br>                   | B     | B     | B     |

> This is only an example, so the versions assigned to your Durable Objects may be different. However, the following is guaranteed:

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
This is only an example, so the versions assigned to your Durable Objects may be different. However, the following is guaranteed:

```

- For a given deployment, requests to each Durable Object will always use the same Worker version.

> - When you specify each version in the same order as the previous deployment and increase the percentage of a version, Durable Objects which were previously assigned that version will not be assigned a different version. In our example, Durable Object "foo" would never revert from version "B" to version "A".

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- When you specify each version in the same order as the previous deployment and increase the percentage of a version, Durable Objects which were previously assigned that version will not be assigned a different version. In this example, Durable Object "foo" would never revert from version "B" to version "A".
```

> - The Durable Object will only be [reset](/durable-objects/reference/troubleshooting/#durable-object-reset-because-its-code-was-updated) when it is assigned a different version, so each Durable Object will only be reset once in our example.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- The Durable Object will only be [reset](/durable-objects/reference/troubleshooting/#durable-object-reset-because-its-code-was-updated) when it is assigned a different version, so each Durable Object will only be reset once in this example.
```

{{<Aside type="note">}}

Typically, your Durable Object Worker will define both your Durable Object class and the Worker that interacts with it. In this case, you cannot deploy changes to your Durable Object and its Worker independently.

> [You should](/durable-objects/platform/known-issues/#code-updates) ensure that API changes between your Durable Object and its Worker are forwards and backwards compatible whether you are using gradual deployments or not. However, using gradual deployments will make it even more likely that different versions of your Durable Objects and its Worker will interact with each other.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
You should ensure that API changes between your Durable Object and its Worker are [forwards and backwards compatible](/durable-objects/platform/known-issues/#code-updates) whether you are using gradual deployments or not. However, using gradual deployments will make it even more likely that different versions of your Durable Objects and its Worker will interact with each other.
```

These Workers features will be supported in the near future. 

- Updating [Secrets via wrangler](/workers/wrangler/commands/#secret) with a split deployment is not supported. You must fully deploy the latest version before using updating secrets.

> - Gradual deployments is not supported for Workers with the [mTLS binding](/workers/runtime-apis/bindings/mtls/). You must use [`wrangler deploy`](/workers/wrangler/commands/#deploy) for Workers with an mTLS binding. 

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- Gradual deployments are not supported for Workers with the [mTLS binding](/workers/runtime-apis/bindings/mtls/). Use [`wrangler deploy`](/workers/wrangler/commands/#deploy) for Workers with an mTLS binding. 
```

> - Creating a gradual deployment with two different configurations for [Smart Placement](/workers/configuration/smart-placement/) is not supported. You must use [`wrangler deploy`](/workers/wrangler/commands/#deploy) for Workers with Smart Placement enabled. 

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- Creating a gradual deployment with two different configurations for [Smart Placement](/workers/configuration/smart-placement/) is not supported. Use [`wrangler deploy`](/workers/wrangler/commands/#deploy) for Workers with Smart Placement enabled. 
```

> - Creating a gradual deployment with [Durable Object migrations](/durable-objects/reference/durable-objects-migrations/) is not supported. You must use [`wrangler deploy`](/workers/wrangler/commands/#deploy) if you are applying a DO migration. 

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- Creating a gradual deployment with [Durable Object migrations](/durable-objects/reference/durable-objects-migrations/) is not supported. Use [`wrangler deploy`](/workers/wrangler/commands/#deploy) if you are applying a [Durable Object migration](/durable-objects/reference/durable-objects-migrations/). 
```
